---
description: 'Misused mobile UX patterns If you are an experienced designer, you probably agree that being inspired by others is not stealing in UI design. It’s best practice'
author: []
datePublished: '2015-11-13T18:34:22.301Z'
publisher:
  domain: medium.com
  name: medium.com
title: ''
dateModified: '2015-11-13T18:34:03.781Z'
sourcePath: _posts/2015-11-13-misused-mobile-ux-patterns-if-you-are-an-experienced-designe.md
published: true
inFeed: true
hasPage: true
inNav: false
url: misused-mobile-ux-patterns-if-you-are-an-experienced-designe/index.html
_context: 'http://schema.org'
_type: Article

---
Misused mobile UX patterns If you are an experienced designer, you probably agree that being inspired by others is not stealing in UI design. It's best practice research. It's using design patterns. It's following the guidelines. It's making sure to use patterns that your users are familiar with to create usable interfaces. Some might say that sticking to the guidelines and following others will kill creativity and, at the end of the day, all apps will look the same. From a UX perspective I see a different problem. Getting used to adapting best practices might make you believe that Google / Facebook / Instagram / \[your favorite app here\] is always right, their design goals are the same as yours and you fail to question them. Here are a few patterns that are (or used to be) considered best practices and yet might not be as good as you'd think at first sight. 1\. Hidden navigation At least half million posts have been written about the hamburger menu, mostly by designers, arguing against it. If you missed all, read one or two, but in a nutshell, it's not about the icon itself but rather about hiding the navigation behind an icon. A slide menu is flexible and convenint to use This solution is pretty tempting and convenient for a designer: you don't have to worry about the limited screen estate, just squeeze your whole navigation into a scrollable overlay that is hidden by default. Experiments show, however, that exposing menu options in a more visible way increases engagement, user satisfaction and even revenue. That's why now all the big players are shifting from hamburger menus towards making the most relevant navigation options always visible. YouTube navigation change annotated by Luke Wroblewski If your navigation is complex, hiding it does not make it mobile friendly. Prioritization does. 2\. Icons, icons everywhere Due to the limited screen estate, it also seems a no brainer to save space by replacing text labels with icons wherever possible. Pictograms take less space, they don't have to be translated, and people are familiar with these after all, right? And every other app does that. With this assumption in mind, app designers sometimes hide functionality behind icons that are actually pretty hard to recognize. Would you guess, for example, that you can send direct messages behind this icon in Instagram? Or, assuming that you never used Google Translate before, what functionality would you expect to access by tapping the pictogram below? It's a common mistake to assume that your users are either familiar with abstract pictograms or they're willing to spend extra time exploring and learning them. Mysterious tab bar on Bloom.fm If you have designed an icon and you feel that a popover label is required to make it usable, you're doing it wrong. Even if you're Foursquare and your users will learn it anyway. Icon hint in Swarm app This doesn't mean that you should not use icons at all. There are plenty of icons that your users know pretty well, mostly those representing common functionality like search, video play, email, settings and so on. (But the users can still be unsure, for instance, what exactly happens when they tap on a heart icon.) Some icons are recognized by the majority of the users and can be considered universal Complex and abstract features, however, should always be displayed with a proper text label. In such cases, icons are still useful as they can enhance the discoverability of the menu items and they can also add a nice touch and personality to your app. Pixelmator navigation Basic funtionality can be effectively represented by icons but for complex features, text labels should be used. (And if you use icons, always have them usability tested.) 3\. Gesture based navigation When Apple introduced the iPhone in 2007, multi-touch technology got mainstream attention and users learned that they could not only point and tap on the interface but also zoom, pinch and swipe it. Gestures became popular among designers and there were many apps that were designed around experimenting with gesture controls. Gesture navigation in Clear app Just like hiding the navigation and using icons instead of text labels, gestures seem sometimes tempting for designers looking to save some screen estate. ("There should not be a delete button, people will just swipe left. Or right. We'll decide.")